Great. You made it through learning about EHR code sets.
Stand up, take a bow, stretch a bit,
because now that you know how to handle these different code sets,
you'll be able to group and categorize for use in ML models.
So let's get going. As we mentioned earlier,
there is a tremendous challenge of taking the 77,000 plus
ICD10 PCS codes and categorizing them into meaningful categories and doing this at scale.
This is where government industry partnership
called the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project,
or HCUP, created a categorization system called Clinical Classifications Software or CCS.
This can be used to map diagnosis or procedure codes from
ICD code sets and has mapping for ICD9 as well as ICD10.
It has single or multi-level options,
which we will go over in more detail in a moment.
For single level categories,
these categories are mutually exclusive,
and there are 285 categories for diagnoses and 231 categories for procedures.
Single level categories can be used for ranking of
codes and help with risk adjustment scoring as well.
CCS multi-level categories are helpful for
more detailed analysis and grouping at a more granular level.
There are four levels for diagnosis codes and three levels for procedure codes.
Here's how they might look for diagnosis multi-level category.
As you can see, seven is a broad category,
but then you can see how it branches off for 7.1 and 7.2 in more detail.
7.1 in hypertension can go into more specificity as you need.
In a moment, we will take a look at how the CSV file that you can download
the site maps the procedure codes to different categories.
If we go to the CCS website,
we can find and download the mapping file for taking
ICD10 PCS procedure codes and map them to categorization with CCS.
Let's take a look at the mapping file,
and we can see how an ICD10 mapping look.
For a list of ICD10 codes and their descriptions on the left,
how would you categorize these different codes?
They all start with similar characters,
but if you were to look at the descriptions,
things might become more challenging.
We've seen terms ranging from basal ganglia and ocular motor nerve.
It would be hard to have a medical expert categorize too,
and these things change.
Well, thankfully, CCS maps these all to the incision and excision of CNS category.
This can be helpful with reducing dimensionality,
and in an upcoming exercise we will work more with this in more detail.
Another common categorization system that you may come across is
a medicare severity-diagnosis related group or MS-DRG,
which is used by MACs to assign charges and as a way to group payment based on
the principle diagnosis and
up to 25 secondary diagnosis codes and up to 25 procedures during a visit/encounter.
Another important categorization system is SNOMED CT,
and it is maintained by a non-profit in London called SNOMED International.
There is a license to use this,
but this can be very helpful for making EHR records interoperable.
It's beyond the scope of this course,
but wanted to expose you to a few other key categorization systems.
There are many others as well.